README.md, before:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/norse/norse/master/logo.png" alt="Norse logo"/>
</p>     

# Norse Notebook Tutorials

These notebooks are designed to familiarize yourself with the [Spiking Neural
Network simulator, Norse](https://github.com/norse/norse).
You are welcome to clone and run the notebooks
locally, but we also links to 
[Google Colab](https://research.google.com/colaboratory/faq.html) where you can run
them in your browser for free.

Note that you can run the code both using CPUs, GPUs, and TPUs. If you run the code on Google collaboratory, select `Runtime -> Change Runtime Type` to run the models on GPUs or TPUs. That will also run significantly faster and save a lot of your time.

## Level: Beginner

| | | |
| ------------------ | --- | --- |
| *Introduction to Norse* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/introduction-to-norse.ipynb) | First encouter with Norse |
| *Simulating and plotting spiking data* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/spiking_introduction.ipynb) | Learn how to describe and visualise event data |
| *Encoding data to spikes* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/encoding.ipynb) | Learn how to encode conventional data into spikes |
| *Single Neuron Experiments* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/single-neuron-experiments.ipynb) | Learn how single neurons behave |

## Level: Intermediate

| | | |
| ------------------ | --- | --- |
| *Training on MNIST* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/mnist_classifiers.ipynb) | Learn how to solve MNIST with spikes
| *Working with event-based data* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/poker-dvs_classifier.ipynb) | Learn how to work with event-based datasets by classifying a set of poker cards
| *Optimization of neuron parameters* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/parameter-learning.ipynb) | Explore how automatic differentiation can be useful to optimize neurons


## Level: Advanced

| | | |
| ------------------ | --- | --- |
| *High Performance Computing with Norse* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/high-performance-computing.ipynb) | Scale Norse models to HPCs! |
| *Using plasticity in Norse* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/stp_example.ipynb) | Learn how plasticity works in Norse |
| *Stochastic Computing* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/stochastic-computing.ipynb) | Explore stochastic computing with spiking neurons |

For more information we refer to our [documentation](https://norse.ai/docs) as well as [our suite of tasks](https://github.com/norse/norse/task/).

You are also encouraged to explore the [main repository](https://github.com/norse/norse/) and contribute by either improving the tutorials, write code, or donate to support our work. Thank you!

Commit message:

Feature jupyterbook (#20)
* Added Jupyter book website
* Reworked introduction notebooks
* Added GitHub build actions

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/norse/norse/master/logo.png" alt="Norse logo"/>
</p>     

# Norse Notebook Tutorials

These notebooks are designed to familiarize yourself with the [Spiking Neural Network simulator, Norse](https://github.com/norse/norse).
This material can be **run the notebooks directly in your browser**.
However, please note that the online execution relies on CPU, which can cause performance problems for larger networks.
If you desire hardware acceleration (like GPU or TPU) you can either clone this repository and experiment locally, or use Google Colab.

If this is your first brush with computational neuroscience, we recommend [this excellent serious of tutorials by Neuromatch Academy](https://compneuro.neuromatch.io/tutorials/W0D1_PythonWorkshop1/student/W0D1_Tutorial1.html).
They provide excellent interactive tutorials on neuron dynamics, linear algebra, calculus, statistics, and deep learning.

## Level: Beginner

| Notebook | Topic | 
| ------------------ | --- | 
| [Introduction to PyTorch and spiking neurons](https://norse.github.io/notebooks/intro_spikes.html) | Introduces biological neurons and PyTorch | 
| [Introduction to Spiking Neural Networks in Norse](https://norse.github.io/notebooks/intro_norse.html) | Build and train spiking models in Norse |
| [Simulating and plotting spiking data](https://norse.github.io/notebooks/intro_plotting.html) | Learn how to describe and visualise event data |
| [Encoding data to spikes](https://norse.github.io/notebooks/intro_spikes.html) | Learn how to encode conventional data into biological spikes |
| *Single Neuron Experiments* | Learn how single neurons behave |

## Level: Intermediate

| | |
| ------------------ | --- | 
| [Training with MNIST](https://norse.github.io/notebooks/mnist_classifiers.html) | Learn how to solve MNIST with spikes
| *Working with event-based data* | Learn how to work with event-based datasets by classifying a set of poker cards
| *Optimization of neuron parameters* | Explore how automatic differentiation can be useful to optimize neurons


## Level: Advanced

| | | |
| ------------------ | --- | --- |
| *High Performance Computing with Norse* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/high-performance-computing.ipynb) | Scale Norse models to HPCs! |
| *Using plasticity in Norse* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/stp_example.ipynb) | Learn how plasticity works in Norse |
| *Stochastic Computing* | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/norse/notebooks/blob/master/stochastic-computing.ipynb) | Explore stochastic computing with spiking neurons |

For more information we refer to our [documentation](https://norse.ai/docs) as well as [our suite of tasks](https://github.com/norse/norse/task/).

We are also more than happy to accept contributions such as improving or adding notebooks, suggestions for improvements, issues for bugs, or donations to support our work. Thank you!
